[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLocks podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, remember
how like in the late 90s like the
internet was starting to become a thing
and [laughter] people thought it would
bring like liberalism and democracy
utopia.
>> I totally bought into that. Like I I you
know people look back at that and like
oh they were naive. Like I don't blame
them. Like I think I bought into that
too.
>> I mean there was something very
wholesome about the sort of mid9s
internet culture where you could go to
everyone's like little individual blog
and people were mostly talking about
their hobbies and things like that. or
at least that was my experience of it.
Probably colored by the fact that I was
in middle school at the time. But it
seemed very innocent.
>> It was very cool. It was very
decentralized. Right. So now we
associate the internet with a handful of
tech oligarchs that control various
kingdoms maybe you could even say within
the internet whether it's the Meta
Kingdom or the Amazon kingdom or
whatever. But it was very decentralized.
Everyone had their own little sites
cobbled together and so forth. And I
totally bought that idea. I was just
like, "Oh, we're all going to talk to
each other. We're going to work things
out and there's no way that
authoritarian governments could ever
control this and we'll finally realize
the true promise of democracy and all
that stuff. I totally bought into it.
>> Fast forward to 2026.
How would you describe the internet now?
>> I mean the word that always comes to my
mind and there are many words is just
this sort of like sheer like sort of
tribalism and conflictualism on every
level, right? nationalism, racism,
bigotry, anti-semitism, sexism, etc.
This is it's just like riven with that.
It's riven with conflict and so forth.
It's heavily centralized. All of the
sort of utopian promise. I'm like, um,
didn't really pan out that way.
>> I would say cesspool.
>> Cespool. That's a good one, too.
>> You have to try really, really hard
nowadays to find like good and useful
corners of the internet. And I'm not
saying that they're not out there, but
it is interesting how far we've deviated
from that initial utopian pre premise of
the internet. The other thing that's
happening, we're recording this on,
let's see, January 27th. What's
interesting is that we're starting to
have even more discussion about the
power of the platform. So over the
weekend, there have been some
allegations that Tik Tok, for instance,
is censoring Minneapolis video or video
of the Minneapolis shooting. And that's
just after the new ownership
>> Yeah.
>> took control of the platform, right? So
they spun off the US business and now it
has all these new owners and people are
starting to talk about well maybe
they're censoring or even if they're not
directly censoring some stuff, maybe the
algorithm is influencing what people
see.
>> Totally. And then there's one other
dimension before we get into the
conversation that I think is very
important here, which is that the
internet is splintering geographically.
Right. So, we've known for a long time,
of course, people talk about the
firewall in China and the Chinese
internet, but it's not just China,
right? We see the UK establishing its
own rules, and we see Australia
establishing its own rules. We saw the
thing a couple years ago with Brazil
temporarily banning Twitter, etc. And
so, there's all these sort of
intermingling of digital platforms and
national sovereignty. And I really do
believe to some extent that a lot of the
leaders around the world are looking at
China in a seemingly more controlled
internet like with jealousy, right? And
they're saying, "Oh, we would love to
like have this level of control over our
sort of town square, etc." And you know,
some countries have the first amendment,
so that makes it very tough, etc. But it
really feels like there are so many
aspects of um the internet that are sort
of not panning out, and people like we
want to constrict what people can see.
We want to tighten the algorithms. We
want to curb some kind of discourse,
etc. And I think this is going to be one
of the biggest stories of our time.
>> Yeah. With China specifically, there's
still a big question which is whether or
not the censorship of the internet
basically allows it to act as a sort of
like safety valve that lets people, you
know, blow off some steam but not enough
steam to actually threaten the regime
over there or whether it's actually a
tool or could be a tool of social change
because people are to some extent
allowed to say some stuff. I think that
question is like still kind of
unanswered. Well, I'm very excited to
say we really do have the perfect guest,
someone who has written a fascinating
new book all about the Chinese internet.
We're going to be speaking with Yeling
Louu. She is the author of the new book,
The Wall Dancers. Thank you so much for
coming on OddLots.
>> Thanks so much for having me.
>> What is this book and why is it called
The Wall Dancers? Yeah. So the wall
dancers, the phrase comes from this term
in Chinese which is called dancing in
shackles and it was first used in the
early 2000s by journalists to describe
what it means to like write and report
under state constraints but slowly
became viral as a term that was used by
I've seen like software engineers use
it, musicians use it, science fiction
writers use it and it really resonated
with me this idea of the dance because
it captured
This idea that to live and navigate
Chinese society is a dance. It's this
dynamic push and pull between state and
society. It means living in this place
that's on one hand rich with innovation
and yet on the other hand rigidly
constrained. And I came to see that this
dance was most dynamic on the internet,
what we know is the space behind the
great firewall. And the people that I
thought were really good and adept at
navigating this terrain, I came to know
them and call them dancers.
>> So this was the really interesting thing
about your book and the reason we wanted
to talk to you. You tell this story of
the Chinese internet through the
perspective of individuals rather than
say the internet platforms that have
come to dominate the space or even from
a sort of state ccentric point of view.
What do you get out of interviewing or
following individuals versus taking that
other approach which you know there are
plenty of books out there about the rise
of waybo and stuff like that?
>> I think my main the main reason behind
this choice was if you look at western
news headlines or headlines in general
about China and Chinese technology it
almost always falls under one of two
binaries. It's reduced to very simple
terms. One is China, the kind of
sprawling economic juggernaut that's
building humanoids and highspeed rail
and it's place of boundless opportunity.
And then you have the like techno
athoritarian oppressive regime where
mindless people have no agency of their
own. And I think the big issue here is
that the Chinese internet is always
framed through and seen through the lens
of American national security and
economic interests. And I wanted to
force people out of these tropes. And
the way to see kind of China and the
Chinese internet in all its complexity
and contradictions is through people and
through individual lives.
>> Yeah. You start the book by telling the
story of a gay man who is able through
the internet to build community, find
people eventually at a time when of
course there was extreme repression.
Homosexuality was I think illegal at the
time. You know, again, this seems both
in China and the US what probably a lot
of people were very hopeful for with the
internet. This idea that oh, people are
going to be able to find community
like-minded individuals, find acceptance
in these digital spaces. And I suppose
in many cases since this happened, but
it is interesting how in both the global
context and the Chinese specific
context, there were similar stories
being told. There were similar hopes.
>> Definitely. I I think of the story of
the internet in China at least as a
romance. But I'm realizing, you know, as
you discussed earlier, the story of the
global internet was also a romance. The
story of the worldwide web was also a
romance. I certainly bought into the
narrative that you bought into. I
thought we were on this like teological
arc towards liberalization. And I think
a lot of people bought into that
narrative. this idea that you know the
Chinese internet despite the fact that
the firewall existed very early was
going to push people towards greater
openness, greater freedom, greater
connection and it would just keep going
on from there and there. So talk to us
about what is and isn't allowed on the
Chinese internet then because as you say
it's more nuanced than just like
outright censorship in many ways.
Although sometimes it is just outright
censorship and you can't say a specific
word like tennmen or something like
that. And I remember actually now that
I'm thinking about it in the early 2000s
when I was in Beijing like the
censorship was very obvious like certain
sites were just outright blocked on TV.
You'd be watching CNN and suddenly it
would go black during a news story or
you get newspapers delivered to you that
had literally physical like
>> sentences crossed out with a black
marker. But what is and isn't allowed.
>> I will start off by saying that if I
could answer that question really
accurately, [laughter]
I would be a very rich woman right now.
I think the reason being like the
censorship ecosystem thrives off
vagueness, right? the fact that it's
vague, the fact that there are no red
lines is what allows it to function so
effectively. I will say that it's
changed quite dramatically over the last
few decades, especially since you were
last there, Tracy. So, you know, back in
the day, I would say the lines were much
clearer. Uh, a lot of people would say
things like, "No tenan men, no Tibet, no
Taiwan." They would call them the three
T's. So censorship back then was very
much allowed about a disscent against
the government, criticism of the
government, but most importantly
anything that would provoke collective
action. So if there was, you know, news
of a protest or news of people gathering
or any type of unease that might boil
into something bigger and bring people
together into a physical town square
that got censored. But over the years, I
would say particularly in the mid210s,
that's come to encompass also anything
that veers from the party's ideological
agenda. So this is where you have
statements coming out saying we don't
want unhealthy marital values appearing
on the internet. Like we don't want I
think recently in 2021, [__] boys got
added to things that got needed to be
taken down the internet. No sissies
allowed. I'm imagining like a handdrawn
sign on a treehouse or something.
>> Yeah. And you know like everything that
comes you know everything that's part of
its ideological agenda is now scrubbed
off. And another thing that I add on
there is like the excessive flaunting of
wealth. You know that's something that's
new that used to be all over the
internet back in the day.
>> We need that here. It's driving people
crazy cuz they look on Instagram and I
remember being you know during co and I
was like in my house and seeing like all
these people like flying around. I got
very resentful. What about criticisms of
the government, but not from an
ideological perspective per se? Because
sometimes you read a story like someone
will have gotten hit by a train or a car
and maybe the police like didn't do an
investigation, you see this big uproar.
talk to us about what's allowed and how
they how the managers of the firewall or
managers of the rules not the firewall
per se think about these incidents like
just yeah criticism of government
handling of things
>> again like I can't say with you know
definitively what's taken down and
what's not taken down I would veer on
saying that whenever there's any
criticism of any kind of local official
local government that's technically
looked on with great caution and taken
down but how it actually works behind
the scenes is that some higher level top
regulator say the the Chinese cyerspace
administration the CIC will write a
directive so maybe there's local
corruption in some county and news
starts spilling out and whoever is part
of that regulatory committee will be
writing a directive that says hey
downplay this let's not have this appear
on way that will then get passed on to
Wayboa's sensors who then start
scrubbing that off their news feed. Or
it happens the other way where Waybo's
sensors aren't even receiving that
directive, but kind of proactively like
a student who is really nervous about
upsetting their teacher in advance will
just go and scrub that off even before
receiving that directive.
>> Oh, interesting. So, selfcensorship
basically.
>> Yes. So, how labor intensive is the
censorship process nowadays? Because you
know I imagine as you said directives
get made and someone has to enact them.
But on the other hand so much of the
internet nowadays is ruled by algos and
most recently AI. You could just you
know design an algorithm that always
downplays political scandal or something
like that.
>> I would say hugely labor intensive.
>> Armies of Wumau. That's what they're
called, right?
>> Yeah. So that specifically refers to the
50 C army. UMO, but that specifically
refers to not necessarily state
sponsored actors or not necessarily
state paid individuals, but people who
are kind of pumping patriotic content,
>> hobbyist nationalists.
>> Exactly. Exactly. So, you know, there's
actually not too much of a difference
between the Wumau and maybe some of the
patriotic trolls and incelss that you
see on X today, right? To what extent is
are some of the people who are posting
like proTrump propaganda on Twitter
essentially the same as Wumlau? There's
this dynamic called flooding which
refers to when incelss or a particular
group of online individuals are pumping
just content onto a news feed to try to
get rid of news that they don't want
people to look at. And that takes place
in China all the time. But I think
that's different from actual employees
who work at places like Wayool or Doin
who are just spending every single day
deleting stuff off the web. And you know
when I I interviewed actually for the
book a sensor for Wayboa and he started
working there at in 2011 I think he was
one of 150 employees. This was right
when Waybo was founded and he said you
know by 2020 he had left [music]
already. There were probably like
10,000. Wow. Yeah.
[music]
I mean, this is sort of what I was
struck by reading your book, which is
that, you know, you talk about these
people who are maybe they're bots, maybe
they're paid, maybe they're just
naturally impelled to join a mob and
want to flood something. But some of
these patterns do not seem distinct to
China. It's almost like they're endemic
to the internet itself, regardless of
what the official rules are. Absolutely
right. We have no sense of whether or
not these are kind of homegrown
grassroots patriotic flames that are
just amplified. And you know when I say
that, doesn't that sound very similar to
what's taking place on the American
internet?
>> I forget the name of that one American
Twitter influencer who's kind of been
talked about as Trump's right-hand
woman. Do you know who I'm talking
about?
>> Laura Loomer.
>> Yes. Laura Loomer. Like isn't there like
>> I was going to say you have to be more
specific cuz there's [laughter] quite a
few nowadays.
>> But yeah, Laura Lumra, you know, when we
read news articles on her, it's is she
being paid out? Is she not being paid
out? And you know, that very much
reminds me of the dynamic with a lot of
Chinese patriotic influencers. Like they
very much earnestly hold the views that
they're sharing, but is there a cut
being taken by amplifying those views
and supporting those views? H since
we've mentioned Waybo a couple times now
and you know you just gave us that
anecdote about the number of sensors
they had and they have experienced
phenomenal growth. One thing I never
understood about Waybo is the kind of
origins story because my understanding
is they were basically born out of
censorship. So there was unrest in
Arumchi I think it was and so a bunch of
existing internet platforms either got
you know repressed or taken down
completely and then the founder of Waybo
was like I know this is an opportunity
for me to get in and start my own
platform. I never understood that
mindset. What was it that he thought he
could do that other platforms had failed
to do?
>> Yeah. So Wayboy actually means little
blog or micro blog and Wayboa is
shorthand for Sino Wayboa which is the
full company's name but before 2009
honestly before 2011 there were many
many ways. There were or there were
dozens of companies that were all trying
to be micro blogging platforms. So there
was a platform called Fanfu. Um there
was a whole bunch. There was a platform
called Ren Ren which was not really a
micro blogging platform. is kind of like
a Chinese Facebook so to say back in the
day
>> people people right
>> exactly exactly and the founder of Sinoa
actually founded what is now known as
waya in 2009 and he did essentially the
same thing as all these other companies
he just did a better job of censoring
that's really what happened as you
mentioned during the protests in Arumchi
in 2009 he just did a much better job of
scrubbing information off the way feed
and at the time and didn't get shut down
or all of these other companies got shut
down. Hm.
>> It's interesting hearing you describe we
did an episode actually it was last
March with Kaiser Quo of the Cynica
podcast. We were talking a little bit
about how Chinese policym works and this
idea of this sort of decentralized
centralized like KPIs right? So Beijing
will this was in the industrial policy
context. Beijing says we want more solar
production or more electric vehicle
production and then all the provincial
leaders figure out what that means in
the context of their region and then
work quasi autonomously to satisfy that.
It sounds similar to some extent with
the rules around censorship especially
when you describe some of that
preemptive self censorship of everyone
trying to figure out the right level or
approach that is consistent with the
broader level mandate.
>> Yeah. No, that's a really good point and
definitely a parallel that I would draw.
You know, for example, if they were to
release industrial policy, a tech
company CEO will then like read that
policy very carefully and be like, okay,
how can we align our company's direction
with the rhetoric of this policy
directive? The same goes with
censorship, you know. So, one of the
subjects that I profile is the CEO or
was the CEO of this skating dating app,
Blude. And so if they release a
censorship directive saying we don't
want [__] boys on our platform, he's
going to go and look very carefully at
the platform and see how are we going to
make sure there are no [__] boys on our
app, right? And so there is definitely
this sense of I don't know if you have
read Harry Potter.
>> I never did.
>> I did. Did you not?
>> I never did. I never did. But Tracy will
get it and 99% of our listeners will get
it. Feel free to use the analogy. It
will go over my head.
>> This analogy really hit it home for me.
But you remember Dolores Umbridge?
>> Yeah. Oh, she was creepy.
>> Yeah. You remember how she would like
post these degrees
>> and then all of the and she would just
post them on the wall and then they
would be kind of vague and then students
would freak out and scramble and you
know people like Malfoy would
aggressively over and interpret and
[clears throat] that I think that's the
dynamic essentially.
>> Remember that. I think this is an
underappreciated point sometimes, but
like the vagueness in the decrees is
done on purpose, right? It's so that
like you're never really sure what is
and isn't allowed and so you do start
self-censoring and also, you know, if
the government wants to go after you,
they can do it because the rule is
purposefully vague.
>> Yeah. And it also means that like each
of these companies have these huge
keyword databases of censored words and
those are extremely valuable. They're
like proprietary assets where you know
they that is how they keep their company
alive essentially, right? It if you have
a better keyword database than the
company down the road, you're going to
have a better chance of surviving. So
just on the keywords, this is one of the
most fascinating things about the
Chinese internet and I think a lot of
people know about it at this point, but
you know, internet users are very
creative in bypassing the sensors. So
they're always coming up with codes,
some of which sound very funny if you
don't know the context. Like isn't there
one horse mud horse mud or mudgrass
horse or something fighting a crab?
>> Exactly.
>> Winnie the Poo. Yeah, there we go.
Winnie the Pooh. All right. That one
>> would be the obvious one. This is sort
of tangential, but do you think that I
guess do you think that kind of
creativity or like code wording?
>> Do you think that's related to the
Chinese language itself and the fact
that a lot of the words are very literal
and also you have a lot of homonyms?
>> Definitely. Like a huge part of it is
like each character can have multiple
meanings. So for example, the most
famous one that you mentioned that
emerged as early as the early 2000s was
this idea of the grass mud horse, right?
And so grass mud horse in Chinese is
ma and just depending on the tones you
shift the tones, it becomes
which means basically your mom. And so,
you know, it became this like rally cuz
ironic rallying cry pushing back
against, you know, authorities who are
being who are overstepping their bounds.
But it's funny and punny at the same
time.
>> I do think even like on Twitter, you see
certain communities, particular more
extremist ones, like you see their
esoteric communications and you see
their code words, but it does seem like
especially with the prevalence of very
subtle homonyms etc. the creativity for
esoteric expression probably gets taken
to a whole new level.
>> Definitely. Definitely. Though an
interesting dynamic that I'm now seeing
is that a lot of the terms that are
being used on the Chinese internet are
actually, you know, echoing a lot of the
sentiment that of the terms that are
being used in the American internet. So
more
>> one term that I've noticed come up, it's
not hugely viral in either place yet, is
this idea of the NPC.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Yeah. Or the non-player character. And I
didn't realize this was like resonating
on both sides.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah.
>> That's interesting.
>> Do you know that one the big chess party
or have are you familiar with that term
or the 3D chess party or something like
that?
>> I'm I'm not sure.
>> There's one I like that I saw that I
started using which is people who are so
defensive of the leadership that every
everything they say is like no no you
don't get it. They're playing 5D chess
or you don't get and so I think they the
term was big chess party or something
like that. I think we need to we need to
start incorporating that more because
that's a good one. Yeah, it's a fun one.
>> But actually on this note, how difficult
is it to keep track of all the different
code words or to learn the new code
words? Because, you know, on the one
hand, if you're saying Winnie the Pooh
in instead of shiinping or something
like that, it allows you to perhaps
bypass censorship.
But on the other hand, if you're talking
in code constantly,
I imagine it means some people like just
aren't getting the message. It's not
resonating with a certain sector of
society. So, how difficult is it? And
what are the pros and cons of having to
keep up with all these keywords
constantly?
>> Absolutely. I mean, it's hugely
difficult. It just means that these
words become more and more obscure. You
know, I'm someone who has made a career
out of studying the Chinese internet and
I'll often read social media posts and
have no idea what's going on. And there
are entire teams. There's actually this
excellent team called China Digital
Times, a nonprofit organization that
literally studies. Exactly. Exactly. And
I have to consult that because sometimes
I'm reading stuff and I have no idea
what it's referring to.
>> Huh. I want to get into more of the sort
of like especially like how an American
or internationally we might learn more
generally about what's going on the
Chinese internet. But before we get to
that, I want to ask there is this trope
or this thing that gets repeated a lot
and you heard it a lot in the Tik Tok
debates and it's smacks of a certain
racism or exoticism or orientalism etc.
where people say, "Oh, on American Tik
Tok, they're all like it's all a bunch
of garbage and rage bait and slob, but
on the equivalent in China, it's they're
learning mathematics and learning how to
play violin and all these sort of
stereotypical things." Can you talk to
us just a little bit about like how
similar dissimilar do these platforms
feel from a sort of day-to-day content
standpoint setting aside sensitivities
about politics? Yeah, I mean I'm like
kind of torn about that statement
because on one hand it kind of like
glorifies I mean it depending on who
you're look who's saying those
statements, right? You're either
glorifying and kind of like projecting a
lot onto the Chinese internet. It really
reveals more about I would say like
American conservative anxiety about
what's appearing on their own internet
and projections because the Chinese
internet is full of like crazy slop too.
Well, this is what I'm like, get it. My
assumption is that the gap is like
massively overstated, but I've never,
you know, consumed whatever the Chinese
version, the original Tik Tok is. So, I
just have no sense like how real these
stereotypes are, or whatever.
>> Exactly. Like when a young student, you
know, in China is just like scrolling
through, they're not just getting
wonderful math content that's going to
like help them excel at school. But what
I will say is that definitely within the
Chinese censorship context, there is
this emphasis on what the party likes to
call positive energy. So it is
definitely much more sanitized than
American social media platforms. Like
you are not going to see quote unquote
unhealthy marital values or like that is
taken down, right? And so while on one
hand I don't want to say like they're
completely different, they definitely
are different in terms of you know what
appears there and what doesn't.
>> Yeah. Since you mentioned students, have
we seen any efforts by the party to, I
guess, crack down on internet use in
general? And I'm thinking back to, you
know, the video game crackdown where
there was, you know, a sense or a
directive that kids were spending too
much time playing video games and they
should be learning important and useful
things. Do you see a similar attitude
towards the internet just out of
curiosity?
not as much. But I would say the video
game piece is the one that you know
comes to mind when you bring it up. I
think the issue being the internet is
just such a vital part of daily
operation and just getting around like
you can't really tell a young person to
get off WeChat if that's both how he
communicates with his mom and his
teacher, you know, and to buy basic
goods. But you can say, "Well, let's get
rid of video games for x amount of hours
every weekday because that's clearly a
net bad.
[music]
If I spoke Chinese, could I open up a
Weebo account from here? Would it be
easy to just start joining and posting
with everyone?
>> Yeah, okay, definitely.
>> Talk to us about I should do that.
That's a good reason to learn Chinese,
which is one of my 2026 goals is to
start taking lessons. So, we'll see.
Good luck. Good luck. Thank you. Thank
you. Talk to us about those that five
minute period in history in which Tik
Tok was banned in the United States and
suddenly there was a flood of American
users to that other Red Note or
something like that. I forgot what it
was called. What talk to us about that
experience and whether anything
interesting emerged from that
>> there was 10 days where that happened or
whatever.
>> Yeah, it was an incredible moment. I
remember it very clearly, but
essentially there was news, impending
news that Tik Tok would get banned in
the US and all these Tik Tok.
>> It was banned for like a day, but one
day wasn't accessible. Yeah.
>> But in the in the leadup to that, Tik
Tok users were freaking out and they
essentially, I think millions of
American Tik Tok users started to flood
Rednote or as it's known in China,
Xiaoongu, which is, you know, people
call it China's Instagram, but that's
not quite the right equivalent. It's
almost this Instagram meets Pinterest
meets Yelp type social media platform
mostly used by young urban women. Has a
slightly more liberal bent to like catch
up on lifestyle news. Now it's all kinds
of news. But I was both on one hand
struck by the irony of the situation,
you know, that the American internet had
somehow become so closed and siloed and
controlled that the way to escape it was
to then jump to
>> arguably sort of like it was sort of
like a reverse Berlin Wall moment in
which the West the West Germans were the
ones flooding into the other side after
this uh I don't know something like That
it's very Yeah, it is irony, doesn't it?
>> Right. It's like
>> we were the ones that had the
restriction placed on us in America and
so then they suddenly like we spill up
find a new hole in the wall to spill
over onto the other side.
>> Exactly. Which is why they were, you
know, like I think American users were
looking for their Chinese spies um kind
of ironically and Chinese users were
teaching them how to get around Red Note
sensors. But I think like key to that
was just like I felt a lot of delight
from that moment because it was the
first time there was this like really
sincere and earnest exchange between
users on both sides of the internet and
I hadn't felt that and seen that in
years if not decades.
>> So one of the debates that's constantly
ongoing when it comes to Tik Tok is what
the algorithm is doing and what content
it's actually surfacing. What are the
like parallels with I guess censorship
in China or where do you see key
differences in terms of what the algo
can do to influence the general
population?
>> So you mean like between the algorithm
in China and the algorithm in the US?
I would say that you know the algorithm
it's it's always really hard to say to
what extent the algorithm is playing a
role in censorship censorship of the
content right and I think that's one of
the big issues or that the big
criticisms that's playing out right now
with this Tik Tok sale even though vast
majority of the ownership is American
the algorithm is still owned by bite
dance so to what extent does bite dance
still have influence over what American
users are seeing that's up to question I
think the difference is in China.
There's just a lot more tools externally
to kind of control what happens after
that. It doesn't matter how the
algorithm is dictating what appears on
the feeds. You know, there are still
content moderators who can come in and
deal with the content that is posted
online after, you know, it's it's
already posted.
>> Joe, I feel like I need to uh make a
public service announcement. actually a
public service announcement recognizing
someone for their public service which
is Sam Row
>> who does the dirty work of trolling
through Tik Tok on a daily basis and
then the only good ones
>> cross-osting the good videos onto
Instagram for everyone who doesn't
actually have Tik Tok like me
>> people should follow him he
>> genuinely a public service
>> genuinely I want to go back to sort of
kind of where we started at the
beginning but I think it's a question of
some pretty significant stakes you Um so
you talk about the rise of the sort of
like very nationalistic impulse that you
see on the Chinese internet these days
which again very similar to here and I
would say and many people would agree
that if you look at the US government
right now you're like the pathologies
the dysfunctions
etc. It's like almost downstream like
the internet has shaped the US
government in many respects. Max Reed,
who we've had on the podcast, who has a
really good newsletter, talked about how
it's like the comment section is one.
And all of the people who are in power
in the US government, are the people who
like 10 years ago were angry about
having been banned from the comment
section and now they have the last laugh
on everyone else because now they hold
the levers of power. Talk to us about
the emergence of the sort of strong
nationalistic undercurrent on the
Chinese internet. when did that like
start to emerge and how does that sort
of like reinforce the political
direction of travel within chi within
Chinese politics?
>> Yeah, I would say similar to what has
happened in the US that patriotic
undertone has always been there as early
as like the pre- internet period of like
the [clears throat] 80s and 90s of
people who you know perhaps were
speaking of a patriotic China in a more
illiberal sense. They wanted strong man
rule. They didn't want, you know, a lot
of the leftists in China, as we think
about them in China and not in the US,
wanted, you know, China not to be kind
of swept up by liberal influence and
needed a strong state to be in charge of
the economy. But I would say similar to
the US, that nationalist voice was very
fringe. It was niche. It was kind of
seen as radical. So you know as early as
2008 for example there were as you
mentioned like the 50 C army but also
what was known as like angry youths or
fening. So 2008 was like a hugely
pivotal moment for China in that the
country was stepping onto the world on
the global stage as this international
presence and it wanted to present itself
as super liberal. But at the time there
were these like very angry youth who
were online and being like look at how
China is being presented by CNN. We're
being kind of smeared by Westerners. But
they were small. I would say today the
Chinese internet is largely fencing.
They're no longer called that. But you
know I would say in 2016 there's a an
emergence of what we now call little
pinks or sophen home. And it's like you
merged the fenting or you merged the
patriot with the Stan or the online fan
>> where you know like what they
>> a softer nationalism.
>> Exactly. Or not even softer but they use
the tactics of online fandom. So, you
know, like they use the same tactics of
like a group of Justin Bieber fans would
do to take down Justin Bieber's nemesis
where except they're doing that with
maybe like Tyenwin who's the who was the
leader of Taiwan. And so I would say
there's this like fusion of online
internet celebrity culture with online
patriotism. And you know, it's not so
much different from like the Reddit and
Zelda.
>> Yeah, it feels very similar. I just want
to just to go down this road a little
bit further. Last year I read um Kevin
Rudd's book about Xihinping and one of
the points that he makes you know a lot
of people think of okay she gets into
power and then sort of takes this
nationalist turn and he makes the point
that actually the sort of more
nationalist turn in Chinese politics
some of the anti-liberal started under
the late Hujanto years which makes me
again wonder whether there was this
brewing force partly cultivated by the
internet that was starting you know that
rather RA than okay Xiinping comes in
and presses the button and turns the
internet in a more nationalist direction
that this was already an emerging thing
and helps explain Xiinping's durability
and ability to consolidate power and so
forth that there's this sort of that
it's a bottomup phenomenon as what as
much as it is a top down thing.
>> Absolutely. And this is why I keep
coming back to 2008 as this huge turning
point. And Kaiser, who's one of your
guests, has made this point a few times,
which is, you know, in in 2008, I think
the big thing that happened at the time
was a the Beijing Olympics and b the
financial crisis. So at this moment
when, you know, Chinese people were
standing up and for the first time a lot
of like the great firewalls was getting
taken down. So a lot of Chinese internet
users in Beijing could see the news for
the first time. They were seeing two
things. They were seeing CNN, you know,
posting news about the Tibet protests
and not covering the Olympics. And
they're also seeing eventually news of
the financial crisis. So there was this
sense of like, well, you know, we
expected to engage with the outside
world and instead the West is
criticizing China and can't get its own
ship in order. And so there is a sense
both among kind of ordinary people of
this growing patriotism but also the
leader the leadership itself because
they were thinking well maybe
liberalization is not the way to go
right maybe like liberalization leads to
unruly financial markets and we need to
steer this ship in a different direction
and so we see both kind of a
nationalistic turn but also in a liberal
turn and that very much precedes
Cinping's rise to power.
>> I think people forget what a huge moment
the 2008 Olympics actually were. Like
actually physically changed Beijing and
then also changed a lot of Chinese
society. But I'm still I'm still annoyed
that they got rid of all the uh fake DVD
stores cuz those were fun. Anyway, we
have to get in an AI question. So with
the advent of AI, a lot of the
technology which is coming out of China
is very impressive. Does censorship
become easier?
I would say yes. I mean the AI has
always been or it has been long used in
Chinese censorship capacity, not just
with the advent of generative AI. So you
know the sensor that I interviewed, he
said that, you know, before he even goes
in and looks at what's being taken down,
a, you know, automated process first
flags all of the sensitive words. I
imagine that just makes that process
significantly easier.
>> Is there any way to gauge sort of public
opinion about the internet or like
because I think there are a lot of
people in the US again who would say
like yes this would be great. I would
love to make rage bait illegal. I would
love it if people weren't flaunting
their wealth. I would love it if there
were not pornography easily available on
the internet etc. I think a lot of
people hear this and it's like yeah
sounds pretty good. Is the is there
discontent with the state of moderation?
Is there discontent with some of the
restrictions? Is there no like is there
a way to like gauge some of these
questions?
>> There's certainly discontent, but I
think it's just very hard to gauge
public opinion in China in general. I
would say broadly speaking there is like
embrace of technological change and
embrace of technological progress that's
more elevated in China than in the US.
But you know there are people who are
unhappy with the censorship regime and
people who like having those controls. I
will say at the heart of that kind of
debate or that envy is just like what
are the governance mechanisms that we
can put in place at this moment with AI
right? I think everyone's freaking out
about this uncontrollable new technology
and China at the very least seems to
have a governance mechanism in place. So
for example there is a algorithm
registry where essentially every single
company that has an AI tool needs to
submit their algorithm to authorities
and that is then listed in a public
registry and no equivalent of that
exists in the US and that's actually I
think you know that's actually a pretty
interesting form of governance and maybe
something that other countries can learn
from. Yeah, I mean people have
criticized ALGO here for being
essentially black boxes. Just coming I
guess full circle back to our intro.
>> The surprising thing here is you know
the US and the Chinese internet have
followed a very similar evolution
despite very different governance
regimes. So I think to some extent you
could imagine all right Chinese internet
heavily censored obviously there's going
to be a surge of nationalism right
whereas in the US I guess maybe it's
more surprising but what's your
overarching thesis for why we sort of
ended up in the same place despite
having very different systems?
>> Yeah I mean that's a good question. I
would say first we were pretty naive
about the fact that technology even
moves in the direction of freedom.
Right? That's kind of like based on the
assumption
>> that's just the direction that we're
going to go in. I would say probably my
overarching thesis is that we've allowed
too much of technology to be centralized
within the hands of a few people and it
doesn't matter you know the US and
American systems people often talk about
the differences but actually they're
remarkably similar. It doesn't matter if
it is government that has centralized
its you know the power of technology in
its hands or as you mentioned like a
handful of tech oligarchs right at the
end of the day how different is Elon
Musk's control over X or Twitter
different from you know the Chinese
government's control of way the whims of
one man essentially dictates the way a
platform plays out and I think that's
the key problem is that we've taken this
like decentralized technology budgy and
make made it highly centralized and it
doesn't matter under what political
system that actually takes place.
>> One thing that I think anyone who the
again the word that always pops into my
head is sort of the tribalizing effect
of the internet. People start to they
hate each other. They start to hate
people who aren't exactly like them. Are
there cleavages within Chinese society
that are deepening or widening because
of everyone in the mix together? Are
there sort of demographic aspects or
whatever in which you could see these
sort of team tensions build and sort of
domestic stability because I think you
see that all the time on the American
internet.
>> I think the biggest cleavage that I've
observed is just along the lines of
wealth
>> and inequality. And that's like another
parallel that I'm seeing today. And
>> the biggest parallel that I see is
between those who are building the new
technologies and those who are using and
being used by it.
>> So you know funnily enough when I visit
China I have a very similar experience
of when I visit Silicon Valley where
everyone who is talking about or
building or investing in these new AI
tools are really hyped or you know like
there there's like an occasional doomer
in the mix but they're very excited
about it.
>> They're still working to build it.
>> Exactly. [laughter] Like there's a sense
of agency, there's a sense of
competition like we are the builders and
makers of the future. Whereas when you
talk to just anyone who is just using
the technology is not aware of how it's
built or involved in that process,
there's this kind of deep [music] sense
of pessimism or a lack of agency, you
know, which brings me back to this like
NPC meme. There's a sense of, well, I
don't actually have a role in this
[music] process. like I'm a nonplayer
character and you know I have no say
[music] and so that actually is the
biggest cleavage that I'm I'm seeing
both in China and in the US.
>> All right, Eling Lou, author of The Wall
Dancers, congratulations. Phenomenal
book and uh really appreciate [music]
you coming on out.
>> Thanks so much for having me.
[music]
Tracy, I really enjoyed that
conversation a lot and it really was not
until
>> I know you like talking about the
internet too.
>> Yeah, I love talking about the I love
the internet even though it is to your
words and I would agree in many respects
a cesspool but thinking about how
similar the American and Chinese
internets are despite ostensibly being
very different in a in the legal sense
is like probably one of the more
fascinating threads I've thought about
in a while I think. Yeah, I was thinking
during that conversation, I was going to
ask what's scarier, an army of little
pinks coming after you or an army of
K-pop fans? And it's sort of a facicious
question, but on the other hand,
>> it highlights this point, right, which
is the internet and the way people
behave on the internet has been
remarkably similar across geographies.
It doesn't really matter like what group
you're in.
>> No, I I I think that's 100% correct. And
you know, again, the K-pop stands as
their own tribe, but probably one of the
less harmful ones, right? Like probably
like
>> they are vicious when they want to be
Joe.
>> Well, I never Right. I actually I think
I tweeted about K-pop once and I was
like, I'm going to mute this again.
>> I'm muting this thread right away. But
this is what we do, right? I mean, it
feels like we as people naturally are
drawn to this sort of, I would say, mob
behavior, right? when presented with
these new technologies in which we can
connect with like-minded people, whether
they share our taste for music or
whether they share sort of national
impulses or whatever else. This is what
most people a lot of people fall into
maybe. And so I think it's like really
interesting that for all Yeah. for all
this like talk of different rules and so
forth that these patterns just sort of
propagate everywhere. The other thing
that struck me, and this has come up
before in other episodes, but it's the
sort of, you know, people think about
China as this big centralized entity,
and it is to some extent, but the way
that centralized entity actually
executes policy ends up being very
decentralized,
>> right? And I think that's kind of
underappreciated, how much scope
individual sensors or individual local
governments have to enact specific
directives and how they go about doing
it.
>> It's interesting that Waybo's
competitive edge was essentially being
the best at censorship, right? And that
was the one that survived and sort of
anticipating and so forth. And it's a
little sad. I liked the decentralized
internet. It was fun going to different
people's websites and seeing what
they're all about and you could
theoretically still do it,
>> but it takes effort in a way that
doesn't feel worth it when you can just
have an algorithm deliver straight what
you're sort of id appeals to you like
directly in the moment.
>> It was a great time. Late 1990s were the
peak of humanity.
>> Unironically unironically that.
>> Are you really going to learn Chinese?
So yeah, one of my New Year's
resolutions is to is to take Mandarin
classes this year and I will do that.
>> I really liked learning Mandarin back
way back in the day when I did it
because there's very little grammar and
I hate grammar because
>> I had to learn German and German grammar
is the worst. And also as you learn
words, one thing I really like about it
is
>> it's very literal. So a lot of words
have meanings that sort of reflect the
thing being talked about. So for
instance,
if you're talking about America, so
America is
>> meo
>> which means beautiful country.
>> So that sort of like
>> oh interesting
>> meaning is embibed into these individual
words or Austria
>> because that's my other half is a which
means
>> eastern empire
>> huh
>> which you know again very descriptive of
what you're talking about.
>> Well wasn't the German is ost right? So
that also means
>> it's a literal translation. Yeah,
>> that's interesting. You know, both of us
have pretty big followings on social
media, particularly Twitter. Wouldn't it
be fun as a personal challenge to like
let's start from zero again on Waybo and
see if we could do it all over again?
It's like we weren't just lucky, we were
really good. Let's start from zero and
make names for ourselves on the Chinese
internet.
>> I think your definition of fun maybe
differs from mine, Joe. It's like I need
to prove to myself that it wasn't just
luck and I need So I need to start from
zero and try again.
>> Oh man. Do it in Mandarin.
>> That's what I'm saying. Do a real
challenge. Do it on hard mode this time.
Yeah. Where I have to do it in a
different language.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow Yelinglu.
She's at Yelinglu95.
Then definitely check out her new book,
The Wall Dancer: Searching for Freedom
and Connection on the Chinese Internet.
[music] Follow our producers, Carmen
Rodriguez at Carmen Arman, Dashelbennet
at Dashbot, and Kellbrooks at
Kellbrooks. And for more OddLots
content, go to bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about the internet, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast [music] platform.
And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely [music]
adree. All you need to do is find the
Bloomberg channel on Apple Podcast and
follow the instructions there. Thanks
for listening.
Yeah. [music]
[music]
[singing]
Hey.